So the camera is rolling and again it's audio and video just as a record mostly audio
But the video is just there as well. So number one, I know you've introduced yourself already
But pronouncing Novelette
So can you for the sake of camera tell us what is your name?
And where and when and where were you born?
My name is Novelette Gordon
I was born in Jamaica
came to England
To London grew up in London went to school
And I spent all my adult life in London
All my family are in London
I
moved to Wales 2004
What do you remember of?
What do you remember of
Before arriving in London, do you remember much of it?
I mean, Jamaica. Yeah, okay
I do remember some things but you know as you get older it gets a bit vague
but I
do remember
My family we were they were business people they cultivated sugarcane and citrus
And they were also active in politics
my great-grandmother my aunties and all that and
often
caused confusion as well because of the represented different party there were different party members and
Similar to England, you know conservative and Labour and you know why I should be in power not you
That kind of stuff. I remember all of that. I remember Jamaica Independence
I
Don't remember everything about it because quite young at the time
I was like about five tell me tell me about the place you grew up to the Clarendon
That is where I grew up in Clarendon and this was all going on
So what I'm saying is I remember I'm Jamaican independent
I remember the cup with the German. I don't forget that
It was like a little cup
Metallic green, you know with the Jamaican cards of cult of arms on it and
You know we have this thing
It's like a whistle but we call it Fifi, you know
Something for the children to play with and all of that and it was like a big festival
You know like fun fair and all that I remember all of that because where's children, you know fun
That's what I remember I remember yeah, we lived in a big house
It was country life
But you know when you're truly you don't know about responsibility you just know about having fun
Do you remember what kind of things you did for fun as a child? So what games you played?
Well, I'm in the tree when you're not supposed to I'm falling out of it and you know something, you know the spade tire
When it rains you go on the hill and you sit in the tire to slide down the hill in it because children don't see danger
I mean we never had toys as such, you know, you had to create your own activities
And that's what you did isn't it hide and seek and and do all the naughty things that you're not supposed to do
are there any
But memories of cultural practices you have from Jamaica anything that you did there
I went to church, I come from a Christian
Tell me about that
My great-grandmother
my grandmother
you know
We we had you know, we had to go to church every Sunday
We had to respect the Bible. We had to pray every day. You always pray before you wake up
Before you go to bed at night
And you pray when you wake up in the morning
You give thanks and that is something that i've carried through my life as well because I myself
Was a Christian. Yeah, I did backslide a bit
You know when you you grow up and you don't have your parents tell you that you have to go to church you do your own thing
So yeah when I left home, I was going to church
And then when I had my children I found my way back into church
You know
When it comes to God I'll say you have to find when you find him yourself
You will know because in the end I didn't understand it until I
Found it myself
You know, it's a different experience
Yeah
What did the average day going to church look like to you when you were young? Do you remember that?
Sunday school every Sunday. Yeah, you know
You put on your best dress
Everything had to be perfect on a Sunday you get
Nice food on a Sunday
Everything nice happens on a Sunday
You know the house we get cleaned
Friday shopping get done saturday
And sunday you don't it's like a rest day you go to church you come home and you have family dinner
and um
Yeah, and that that's our sunday was like a rest day and it was family time
Which I think that's what we're lacking
and
now because
Time has changed and we sunday was secret. It's not anymore because everybody work every day of the week
And there's no
No day put aside
Especially some of us. Yes, the older one, but that generation is dying out
But the younger people is adapting different principles, isn't it?
So tell me about then
The move from jamaica to the uk or london then
What was it? What was the motive? What were your motives? Like what was the reasoning? I don't know motive
What it was?
My grandmother and my grandmother had come to england
And then I was left with my auntie until they were able to send for me
And so that's what happened. The intention is that I would have come to england
You know my mom she was sent for me when she settled and that's what she did
Um when I came to england my mom she had
My sister she had a sister that was born here in england
So i'm the first born
Um
Yeah
What's the memory of that flight over um when you came on my own when you landed what did you feel
Cold it was cold
It was winter. Um
Well, yeah, it was just different environment, isn't it? I remember um
My mom she but my mom she recognized
Me because of the clothes that I had on she had sent it to jamaica for me
Everything that she had sent I had it on so she knew
you know and um
I remember she took me to we're living in shepherds bush at the time
And um, I remember she took me to the market and she bought me lots of nice pretty clothes. I don't forget the bed slippers
you know orange one with fur across
And all the bed slippers I was telling about it the other day actually yeah
and um
At that time, um, she was living my auntie shepherds bush
you know living a big house and all that and then
my
It wasn't long after that. My grandmother had bought her a house
in hackney
And then we moved it. We moved to stoneman
And that's where I lived
Yeah, you know
So even though I left home when I left home at the age of 17
um
I only lived on the road from my mom when it was like I never really did leave
Home because it's like it was always in my life
And all that and if I wish to speak the truth, right?
When I moved down here
It's like I I felt like i've actually left home
Home
Is that that's when I became a woman
That's interesting so you didn't feel like leaving jamaica was leaving home you felt like leaving london was leaving home
Yes, well, I've you know, i've been going from nine years old and until
45 you know
um
because
You I mean you're asian so you you understand the entire family network
And everything the family is in it and whether it's for good or for bad
But sometimes you just want to be left alone to make your own decision
And give you know
Nobody's you know, you know relationship and they have something to say about it
You know and um
You know because we all have choices and sometimes we make good choices and we make bad choices
You know, but you still need to give people a chance
You know, you need to give them a chance to see if it's going to work, you know sabotage it before
Even get off the ground
So tell me about um
Then arriving in wales. What did that feel like when you first arrived in wales?
You just mentioned it briefly, but what was the feeling you you know, imagine your first trip here?
What did you feel like?
It was like a dream. I had to pinch myself
It was like because I felt and I still do even you know, it's because sometimes I think about it
Well, it was a brave move because the only person I had down here that I knew was my son
Nobody else
you know, um
And I was like, you know because my relationship broke down
And everything and you know
I didn't get to lots of support from my family
So I think that is why I was so down as well because the people that supposed to be comforting you
They weren't there in town or that's how it felt
Yeah, you know, maybe
My perception is wrong. I don't know but that is how it felt. I was on my own
And I just want us to
To go I didn't care where as long as I didn't live in hacking anymore
You know and um
Yeah, so that's why I I thought you know
That was a brave move to just take up yourself move into a city
you know, no nothing and I couldn't get a rental accommodation because um
Because I was working at the nhs at the time and you know, um
Your salary that you ate doesn't qualify you to to get social lives in
and all of that so
I had to buy
You know and which I didn't know that I had the ability to buy a house of my own
Yeah, you know, so it was like a dream because
I didn't know as a single mom
Because by now I am I was a single mom. Yeah, you know working
You know, my son was still in school at the time
and to you know, take up this responsibility and
You know, it's like I just say it could only be good
That's true
That's how I look at it, you know because it was like a dream and and sometime I nearly finished paying for my house now
and you know things that happened to me a lot along the way so it would be quite distressing because
And ill health came in the way as well and then
You know, so you struggle a bit of hardship not knowing
What tomorrow is going to be i'm going to lose the house because I don't earn the same money anymore
and
It was all sort of things but i'm still here
And i'm still here. I only work part-time everything else I do is voluntary
You know, um
And in this short space of time that i've been here
I am well respected people does appreciate what i've done and
I don't know. I'm sorry. Can you can you try and recollect maybe the first
Month in wales. What did you see? What did you witness? What did you experience?
Where place did you go to in wales when you first arrived? Well, the first month in wales
Because
I don't really thought about that. But uh, I was back and forth in london a lot because I still worked in london at the time
you know, because although
The intention was to get a permanent job down there
In the nhs or wherever at the time so when I first moved down there
uh, I started on did agency because
It helped me was to know my way around
And all of that, you know wells and and all that so yeah, um
The first month or even the first six months i'll say it was probably more work
It was more that than anything else not not
Enjoyed anything or I didn't know any place
as such
You know apart from where my son would take me like local shopping
And things and um
It was back and forth to work
Because even though um, I did agency work. I had my job in london
You know, which that was my main job. So I had to secure that
so, um, the agency was like on my days off
You know
And then one day, um
I went to town
and all that and then
What I noticed there wasn't really any black people. There was black people, but I didn't see them
Is is when I um
One day I went shopping in pill
And I saw the new testament church church of god
and I thought oh
Because that's the church I went to in london
You know, so um, I started going there
And um, that's when I met pastor freckleton
And they were very welcoming
And all of that and you know, there was stuff going on in the church and then
You you as you start going you start getting familiar with the the church members
And all of that until you start making your own friends
you know in church and
You know, I know it and people's inviting in places
And all of that and that's how I grew actually and I mean at one time the only people I knew was the people in church
Yeah, you know and
Yeah, that's how it was and then so why is faith so important to yourself
Sorry, why is faith so important to yourself today?
I
Don't really it's not something that I thought about I think it's just that it's within me
Uh, I believe that christ is in with you the spirit
son of god
It is it's the foundation
You know, it orders your step it keeps you in in line
You know to do the right thing in life
The truth because for me faith is about truth and love
and um
Love yourself
As others first you do have to love because if you don't love yourself, you can't love others
Um
I think faith is everything
It is the foundation
Have you maintained any customs and traditions then? I mean, I'm guessing the church is that from original jamaica
To london to my faith. Um, I wouldn't say um
What's the word
You know, um having faith it's it's it's it's not uh
I don't think it's it's got anything to do with whether you're black or white or asian
You know, I think
This is
It's something because even non-christians
I've met people who are non-christian. They don't grow up in christian home and they find faith
You know, you couldn't find it anyway
You know
I just think it's an experience that
It's an individual thing
It's not something that's easy to describe
Yeah, you know, but um
the one thing
But it's not hard. It's it's just as I said, um
Yeah, you know
Whether you're muslim or you're christian you believe in one thing live your life in truth speak the truth
Do good to others
And that is what it's about. Just just be yourself. Don't try to be anything else. Don't force it
So
Tell me about how these principles have led to the work you do today
So you mentioned about volunteering on another project. So i've always done that tell me about that
work you do
Maybe I need to go back to the beginning
Of my first
Trade was hairdressing I started as a hairdresser
and studied hairdressing for five years and
Practiced for 20 years
But even though I did hairdressing I always enjoy cooking
and you know making things knitting and all of that and
And then
Even even though I did hairdressing also did I went to college part time and then sugarcraft
making flowers
out of sugar
Baking and advance because my grandmother was a baker anyway
You know, so it's the heartbeat. Oh, I love that. I can't rub the sugar for me
You know, I know I said that's where the baking came from because my grandmother baked, you know
But I took up the sugar craft because you know when I was baking people said oh it's a shame you don't decorate
I know that's and that's what made led me to have the interest in sugarcraft and did that and then
you know and
And then even though I was doing hairdressing I had a friend who had
Was in the catering business and all that and because they know that I do stuff that we used to help each other
And I ended up having
a calf
doing Caribbean food and all of that and
Sometimes like I'll go and run my own my friend
I'm hairdressing shop and he'll come and work in the food shop for me
You know what I mean? So I could we help out each other and that's what was going on and then
Where I had this shop the counts was redeveloping the area in douleston and then
And then
So that's how I did give it up at that time although I was doing private work and then um
And and and and then when they they they did rebuild everything and all that
We could have gone back there, but it was so much money the overhead was so high and all I thought it was worth it
And I went to the job center looking for a job and um on the billboard they had um
Health care system required and trainer be given
And I applied thinking I was going to get a job because what do I know about working in a school?
right and um
That's what happened, but it was the best thing that happened because then um
Start working with the hospital and then um, I moved from job to job until I became um
A great mental health and I enjoyed the work and enough or i'm not meant to leave so I might as well do the training
And so I did my nice training mental health nurse
Right, but then all the other things that um that I used to do
Fell into place because then I was able
to um
Look after the patients like cut their hair shampoo their hair make it look nice when their family come and visit them
And we had a social club so every monday
Because monday was quite damn cool the day after we came, you know the patients that will go there
And I'll go to you know do their hair who wants their hair shampooed and trim and all that
And then and then sometimes
You know i'll go to um like meetings to get money to ask for money to buy things to do that
They'll say oh, but the nhsa got no money
So this is not new thing the nhsa is having no money and all that so I had to do my own charity
So I do my own fundraising bake cakes cook food
And bric-a-brac and all that and I did it twice a year
and raised the fund to buy hairdressers and stuff and
And stuff for the group meeting
and all that
and that's
How it really escalated and till it became a routine thing and then oh no, why are you not doing nothing this
Yeah, you know and um
I did it for my children's school
Yeah, you know like um bake cake and they sell it to buy books for school and things like that
And all that it just continued when I came to wales
You know um
Side life side life is a voluntary group
Because I became fishing when I became fishing impaired. I was going I was getting to various meetings and and all of that and
There's no no babbling. I don't know if you've heard of her
I am she's an option
I can't come to us. Yeah, that's what she is, but um, she worked in football
And she used to come to these me up, you know, and we used to meet up quite regularly and
I used to go to her talks and um
I wonder you know, we're talking about
People, you know, what can we do to bring?
Black people out so that they can talk about
Their vision impaired or what means they that I know that and and this other group
Came about three of us
Right started a group myself. She made me she mentioned
Pakistan at the moment we should probably be doing this and um
And yeah, the group started out with um, four of us actually because um, one of the guy who was with us he died
Minnesota's in peace. Yeah
And the group grew till now we've got about 30 40 members
And some of them, you know, we have they're not just about talking about your condition and do fun things as well
We do craft
knitting painting we do day trips
you know fun things as well and
you know just like um
50 plus
You know, we all make friends and and all that we look out for each other
someone don't turn up before what happened to you then
You know and um, I think it's just part of you you just do anyway a couple weeks ago we had a
um
Caribbean something
Was it minrush?
here
and I was able to
Cook a whole range of Caribbean food and set it up nice made it a bit more nice
Roy and all they'll tell you about it. I did that
So single-handedly, you know
The other girls they did asian stuff. I did cabins. So some other combination
And it really really went down the tree if anything is put age alive on the map
Because you know, it was well attended and
It was really the theme was togetherness and it did work
but everybody, you know
Was on the same level
mingling eating, you know happy
music telling their stories
And it was so lovely
Do you just decide question do you have any mementos or heirlooms that uh could help explain some of these things you've done
Fetch graphs
Yes, we do but I don't have it in my house, um
Oh, i've got um, like some poster um leaflets like with my name and
That I mean the reason I ask is
The people's collection is a digital collection it allows us to input first graphs and flyers and etc into the the archive
And there would be a chance to place things in there. You just do I think visual story change be powerful
Yeah, I understand what you said. Um, if you've got stuff, would you be able to um
Donate them to be scanned. They wouldn't be kept. They'd be scanned and you'd have them back
Would that be possible for yourself?
There's a photograph on on there that that that was to do with side
It would be side life i'd have to get from side life because I don't really have much at home that's okay
um
I'll move on to
The final question really all the theme of questions is how has a july or the 50 plus network been for you?
How is it?
Have you enjoyed it what have you enjoyed about it? Well everything has brought me out of myself
I met new friends and know about culture
and the samples are
Was well mixed, you know with um caribbean asian
european
welsh
You know, we'll even you know build from different backgrounds and all that but it's like um
It's brought us together and educated us about each other as well and better understanding
Yeah, you know, um
as well and
You know, it's just something maybe
Even 20 years ago probably was I heard of because
Racism is something I don't even know if it really got where I think sometimes people don't know that they are
They say things and and they don't pay attention to what they're saying, um, you know about age alive
is
Is is brought us to new heights that's all I could say because we're all blending and it's brought us out of ourselves
We all look out for each other
perform each other
we have a
WhatsApp group and that's how we communicate
A lot of time what he was doing what who's attending what you know, like this meeting there's a lovely, you know
So so I never met you before but I'll meet you now and all that but I I didn't know who this nice was
You know, um
Yeah, that's how you know
As I said, some of us is on holiday at the moment if I come september everything will be back to normal
Um great. I mean at this point we've kind of showed shared I think you've shared quite nicely about
Your journey from Jamaica to living in london
And arriving in here in wales and how faith has been a kind of thread through a lot of this
um
Is there anything else you would like to leave on record because again, this is the kind of information that can
Last up to 50 to 100 years really if you want to um, so if you know, if you're a great great great
relatives of sorts or friends or someone a friend I mean
About his name called gordon and they found this person. Yeah, because my anything else you'd like to leave
As I said, my my son is my two welsh girl
And they've got four children
My grandchildren they speaks welsh fluently
You know, um
So I think that is quite impressive
because
even though
Originally, I had no roots in wales. I have now because even if I chose was to go back to london
Because like my mother and her sisters and all that is still in london
I'll still have to be coming to wales because
You know the 20 years i've grounded
You know, i've got my own family here or my children who didn't want to come to wales there in wales now
So i'm not on my own although I came on my own
originally
You know my my three boys are here
They all got big Welsh girls
and
They have their foundation and they won't go back to london
You know, so yeah, um
Wales is my home now
Great any last final message to them maybe uh as when you know little ones grow up
That you'd want to leave maybe maybe uh
Uh something to live by uh, what's your well well
My principle is to live your life in truth
Help, you know be that reach out to people
Don't judge
Because sometimes people assume
and they
Assume wrongly know the person for you judge
Thank you very much
Last thing that's we're we're we're good there. I mean if there's nothing else i'll stop that's okay. Yeah